feat: update IPNS specification (#319)
ipfs/specs: IPNS.md

IPNS is based on [SFS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-certifying_File_System). It consists of a PKI namespace, where a name is simply the hash of a public key. As a result, whoever controls the private key has full control over the name. Accordingly, records are signed by the private key and then distributed across the network (in IPFS, via the routing system). This is an egalitarian way to assign mutable names on the Internet at large, without any centralization whatsoever, or certificate authorities.

## IPNS Keys

### Key Types

Implementations MUST support Ed25519 with signatures defined in [RFC8032](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8032#section-5.1).

Implementations MAY support RSA, Secp256k1 and ECDSA for private use, but peers

> from the public IPFS swarm and DHT may not be able to resolve IPNS records

Reviewer: Seems mostly reasonable as this copies from the libp2p peerID spec, however RSA keys might still be very common since they used to be the default in implementations like kubo (formerly go-ipfs) and js-ipfs. This is the same as in the libp2p world, but given we're not just referencing that spec directly figured I'd call it out here in case anyone comes looking.

It'd be nice if we could post some numbers here (on GitHub) coming from the Hydra nodes on the distribution of key types justifying that Ed25519 covers most usage.

Author: Will try to get %  usage of Ed25519, RSA, Secp256k1 and ECDSA and get back to this with numbers.

Author: Some quick numbers from hydras (records that are currently valid)

```
Total DynamoDB Records: 256697
  ipns: 12287
  pk:   244410

DynamoDB Record Value Sizes:
  avg:    299.62269913555673
  std:    45.88040769545226
  median: 299
  max:    2033
  min:    36
IPNS Records Signatures:
  v1:     12287
  v2:     6892
  with pk: 913
PK Records Key Types:
  rsa:       244403
  ed25519:   3
  secp256k1: 0
  ecdsa:     4
```
ed25519 is used by default and inlined, "3" is probably someone writing own  IPNS tool and embedding it the same way RSA - can be ignored.

“with pk” means IPNS records with IpnsEntry.pubKey present.
RSA  is dominating here, and used in ~7% of cases. 

I think Ed25519 being ~93%  and RSA ~7% is a good argument to keep Ed25519 as MUST and change RSA to SHOULD (same as in PeerID spec). 

I adjusted language in https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/319/commits/41612da4bebec847612e3efcce83094205903f63

  - Implementations MUST include this value in both `IpnsEntry.ttl` and inside the DAG-CBOR document at `IpnsEntry.data[ttl]`.
- **Public Key** (bytes)
  - Public key used to sign this record.
    - If public key is small enough to fit in IPNS name (e.g., Ed25519 keys inlined using `identity` multihash), `IpnsEntry.pubKey` field is redundant and MAY be skipped to save space.
    - The public key MUST be included if it cannot be extracted from the IPNS name (e.g., legacy RSA keys). Implementers MUST follow key serialization defined in [PeerID specs](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/peer-ids/peer-ids.md#key-types).
- **Signature** (bytes)
  - Provides the cryptographic proof that the IPNS record was created by the owner of the private key.
  - Implementations MUST include this value in `IpnsEntry.signatureV2` and follow signature creation and verification as described in [Record Creation](#record-creation) and [Record Verification](#record-verification).
- **Extensible Data** (DAG-CBOR)
  - Extensible record data in [DAG-CBOR](https://ipld.io/specs/codecs/dag-cbor/spec/) format.

>   - The default set of fields can be augmented with additional information. Implementations are free to leverage this, or simply ignore unexpected fields.

Reviewer: Probably obvious, but might be worth flagging that any new fields that aren't added to the spec could run into collisions and/or misinterpretations (e.g. like custom HTTP headers).

Also, technically you can add more data to the protobuf as well unless we're speccing that implementations should be stricter in how they interpret the protobufs (e.g. no adding field number 100 into the protobuf) it's just not covered by the signature so not something most users would want.

Allowing for new protobuf fields does give us some extensibility if we want to modify the format more into the future though, so probably worth keeping that around so long as there are record size limits in place.

Author: Added lower size limit https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/319/commits/cc5941b55ee0af7f05f83cb84e9451dd786f3842, think this is easier from implementation perspective (does not require custom protobuf implementation, and the size check of entire thing is very inexpensive).

Reviewer 2: @lidel Maybe the spec should recommend applications make their own field with sub-fields under it, e.g. `IpnsEntry.data.my-app.field`?

Author: Thanks, added best practices in https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/319/commits/78c9f045cb79ed7587ec8ed889dc2d90e4b486f4

```protobuf
message IpnsEntry {
 enum ValidityType {
  // setting an EOL says "this record is valid until..."
  EOL = 0;
 }

 // deserialized copy of data[value]
 optional bytes value = 1;

 // unused legacy field, use 'signatureV2' instead
 optional bytes signature = 2;

 // deserialized copies of data[validityType] and data[validity]
 optional ValidityType validityType = 3;
 optional bytes validity = 4;

 // deserialized copy of data[sequence]
 optional uint64 sequence = 5;

 // record TTL in nanoseconds, a deserialized copy of data[ttl]
 optional uint64 ttl = 6;

 // in order for nodes to properly validate a record upon receipt, they need the public
 // key associated with it. For old RSA keys, its easiest if we just send this as part of
 // the record itself. For newer Ed25519 keys, the public key can be embedded in the
 // IPNS Name itself, making this field unnecessary.
 optional bytes pubKey = 7;

 // the signature of the IPNS record
 optional bytes signatureV2 = 8;

 // extensible record data in DAG-CBOR format
 optional bytes data = 9;
}
```

Notes:

> - The maximum size of `IpnsEntry` is 2 MiB. Bigger records MUST be ignored by IPNS implementations.

Author: Things are more complicated: the introduction of the extensible `IpnsEntry.data` CBOR field means some people and services WILL start putting additional metadata there, and that means all bets and estimates will be off.

Still, we need to create some arbitrary headroom. It is easier to increase the limit than to decrease it.
I've switched to max to 10 kiB as it is closer to realistic needs, and adjusted the language to match bitswap one (see 1baf069)

@alanshaw  / @vasco-santos do you have any metrics around record sizes on w3name?  or thoughts on this matter?

> - The maximum size of `IpnsEntry` is 2 MiB. Bigger records MUST be ignored by IPNS implementations.

Author: Some quick numbers from hydras (when the validity is at max 7d in the past)

```
Total DynamoDB Records: 394585
  ipns: 150175
  pk:   244410
  
PK Records Key Types:
  rsa:       244403
  ed25519:   3
  secp256k1: 0
  ecdsa:     4

DynamoDB Record Value Sizes:
  avg:    318.08328497028526
  std:    127.86082973202544
  median: 299
  max:    3350
  min:    36
```

And just the extensible data field: 
```
IPNS 'IpnsEntry.Data' Size:
  avg:    139.27228998453873
  std:    9.81409166725822
  median: 141
  max:    182
  min:    91
```

10 KiB sounds ok, leaving some room for growth and experimentation without being blocked by implementations that follow this spec, but lmk if we should adjust.

```protobuf
message IpnsEntry {
 enum ValidityType {
  // setting an EOL says "this record is valid until..."
  EOL = 0;
 }

 // deserialized copy of data[value]
 optional bytes value = 1;

 // unused legacy field, use 'signatureV2' instead
 optional bytes signature = 2;

 // deserialized copies of data[validityType] and data[validity]
 optional ValidityType validityType = 3;
 optional bytes validity = 4;

 // deserialized copy of data[sequence]
 optional uint64 sequence = 5;

 // record TTL in nanoseconds, a deserialized copy of data[ttl]
 optional uint64 ttl = 6;

 // in order for nodes to properly validate a record upon receipt, they need the public
 // key associated with it. For old RSA keys, its easiest if we just send this as part of
 // the record itself. For newer Ed25519 keys, the public key can be embedded in the
 // IPNS Name itself, making this field unnecessary.
 optional bytes pubKey = 7;

 // the signature of the IPNS record
 optional bytes signatureV2 = 8;

 // extensible record data in DAG-CBOR format
 optional bytes data = 9;
}
```

Notes:

- IPNS implementations must support sending and receiving serialized

>   `IpnsEntry` of size less or equal 10 kiB. Handling records larger than 10 kiB

Reviewer 2: Maybe "IPNS implementations must support sending and receiving a serialized `IpnsEntry` less than or equal to 10KiB."?

Author: Thanks. I applied your suggestions + created `Record Size Limit` section so we have single place with the value: https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/319/commits/1a8f0c908f7ada0a6164bdbfe76b1354355b8953

2. Create a DAG-CBOR document with the same values for `value`, `validity`, `validityType`, `sequence`, and `ttl`
   - This is paramount: this CBOR will be used for signing.
3. Store DAG-CBOR in `IpnsEntry.data`.
   - If you want to store additional metadata in the record, add it under unique keys at `IpnsEntry.data`.
   - The order of fields impacts signature verification. If you are using an alternative CBOR implementation, make sure the CBOR field order follows [RFC7049](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7049) sorting rules: length and then bytewise. The order of fields impacts signature verification.
4. If your public key can't be inlined inside the IPNS Name, include a serialized copy in `IpnsEntry.pubKey`
   - This step SHOULD be skipped for Ed25519, and any other key types that are inlined inside of [IPNS Name](#ipns-name) itself.
6. Create bytes for signing by concatenating `ipns-signature:` prefix (bytes in hex: `69706e732d7369676e61747572653a`) with raw CBOR bytes from `IpnsEntry.data`
7. Sign concatenated bytes from the previous step using the private key, and store the signature in `IpnsEntry.signatureV2`

> 8. Confirm that bytes with serialized `IpnsEntry` are less than or equal 10 kiB in size

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Confirm that the serialized `IpnsEntry` bytes sum to less than or equal to 10KiB in size"?

### Record Verification

Implementations MUST resolve IPNS Names using only verified records.
Record's data and signature verification MUST be implemented as outlined below, and fail on the first error.

> 1. Before parsing the protobuf, confirm that bytes with serialized `IpnsEntry` are less than or equal 10 kiB in size

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Before parsing the protobuf, confirm that the serialized `IpnsEntry` bytes sum to less than or equal to 10KiB in size"?

 // the record itself. For newer Ed25519 keys, the public key can be embedded in the
 // IPNS Name itself, making this field unnecessary.
 optional bytes pubKey = 7;

 // the signature of the IPNS record
 optional bytes signatureV2 = 8;

 // extensible record data in DAG-CBOR format
 optional bytes data = 9;
}
```

Notes:

- For legacy reasons, some values must be stored in both `IpnsEntry` protobuf and `IpnsEntry.data` CBOR.
  This should not be ignored, as it impacts interoperability with old software.

### Record Size Limit

IPNS implementations MUST support sending and receiving a serialized
`IpnsEntry` less than or equal to **10 KiB** in size.

Records over the limit MAY be ignored. Handling records larger than the
limit is not recommended so as to keep compatibility with implementations and
transports that follow this specification.

### Backward Compatibility

Implementations that want to interop with the public IPFS swarm MUST maintain
backward compatibility for legacy consumers of IPNS records:

- A legacy publisher MUST always be able to update to the latest implementation
  of this specification without breaking record resolution for legacy consumers.

> - A legacy consumer MUST always be able to resolve IPNS name, even when publisher

Reviewer 3: does "resolve IPNS" name mean they should be able to validate the signature? Or just that they can read the record?
Isn't that already not the case since supporting all Key types isn't required there's already consumers that can't validate all signtures? And new key types (or signing prefixes) would invalidate old consumers?

Author: > does "resolve IPNS" name mean they should be able to validate the signature?

@paulgmiller  Yes, IPNS resolution includes signature verification step: records that have invalid signatureV2 are ignored by implementations like Kubo or js-ipfs.

> And new key types (or signing prefixes) would invalidate old consumers?

The use case we are protecting here is preexisting IPNS client resolving preexisting IPNS names for mission-critical updates. In that case, the key type will not change, records are published with the same key, and the old signature must be present next to the new one to ensure the name still resolves for the legacy client.

An example scenario is as follows:
-  IoT device implemented minimal support for RSA and V1, and uses it for polling for new firmware updates.
- It retrieves record with V1+V2 signatures, validates V1 and fetches new firmware
- The new firmware has support for IPNS V2, and uses a new IPNS name for polling for updates (requires V2 signatures, and can also use a different key type like Ed25519).

>   updated to the latest implementation of this specification.

Author: ## Some DHT  stats

We've looked at some stats from Hydra nodes (a small sample of recently valid records):
```
IPNS Records Signatures:
  v1:       9513
  v2:       5821
  with pk:  733 (RSA)
  nil data: 3692 (V1-only)
```

Every V2 record is also V1 (V1-only records have no data field, so their count is in  "nil data").
This means for the sample size of 9513 we have ~61% of V2+V1 and ~38% V1-only. 
We also looked at other time-ranges and V2 is growing, V1-only is decreasing – seems to follow the usual slow update curve we also see for Kubo itself.

## On this upgrade strategy

It is reasonable to expect both clients and  publishers will update over time, 
but the act of updating a publisher should not introduce any record resolution regressions for legacy nodes.

To make this clear, I've documented backward compatibility policy in https://github.com/ipfs/specs/pull/319/commits/b926e8c696a31686c26dfa931632cc307b411df5

> - A legacy publisher MUST always be able to update to the latest implementation
>   of this specification without breaking record resolution for legacy consumers.
> - A legacy consumer MUST always be able to resolve IPNS name, even when publisher
>   updated to the latest implementation of this specification.

This policy ensures the spec is aligned with existing code that was created to ensure IPNS implementations in GO and JS are backward-compatible from the perspective of legacy consumers:
- both Kubo and js-ipfs produce V1+V2 records
  - This allows legacy go-ipfs <0.9.0 node to correctly resolve IPNS records published by modern Kubo 0.15+
  - Maintaining this contract is important, I've added it to this spec
- Old go-ipfs <0.9.0 node publishing legacy RSA+V1-only records   should be able to upgrade to Kubo 0.16  and start publishing V1+V2 records, allowing for V2 resolution on modern clients (but not break V1-only for legacy ones).

2. Create a DAG-CBOR document with the same values for `value`, `validity`, `validityType`, `sequence`, and `ttl`
3. Store DAG-CBOR in `IpnsEntry.data`.
   - If you want to store additional metadata in the record, add it under unique keys at `IpnsEntry.data`.
   - The order of fields impacts signature verification. If you are using an alternative CBOR implementation, make sure the CBOR field order follows [RFC7049](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7049) sorting rules: length and then bytewise. The order of fields impacts signature verification.
4. If your public key can't be inlined inside the IPNS Name, include a serialized copy in `IpnsEntry.pubKey`
   - This step SHOULD be skipped for Ed25519 keys.
6. Create bytes for signing by concatenating `ipns-signature:` prefix (bytes in hex: `69706e732d7369676e61747572653a`) with raw CBOR bytes from `IpnsEntry.data`
7. Sign bytes from the previous step using the private key, and store the signature in `IpnsEntry.signatureV2`

### Record Validation

Implementations MUST resolve IPNS Names using only verified records.
Record's data and signature verification MUST be implemented as outlined below, and fail on the first error.

> 1. Before parsing protobuf, confirm `IpnsEntry` size is less than 2 MiB

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Before parsing the protobuf, confirm that `IpnsEntry` is less than 2MiB in size" would be better wording?

Author: ```suggestion
1. Before parsing the protobuf, confirm that `IpnsEntry` is less than 2MiB in size
```
